Images Speak in Images: A Generalist Painter for In-Context Visual Learning
Xinlong Wang1* Wen Wang2∗ Yue Cao1∗ Chunhua Shen2 Tiejun Huang1,3
1 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 2 Zhejiang University 3 Peking University
https://github.com/baaivision/Painter
Painter
Task prompts Paintings
Inputimages
Figure 1. An illustration of the in-context inference of Painter. Painter is a generalist vision model, which can automatically perform
vision tasks according to the input task prompts without the task specific heads. Painter can not only perform in-domain tasks with highly
competitive performance, such as semantic segmentation (Row 1), instance segmentation (Row 2), depth estimation (Row 3), keypoint
detection (Row 4), denoising (Row 5), deraining (Row 6), and image enhancement (Row7), but also be able to rapidly adapt to various
out-of-domain vision tasks using simple prompts, such as open-category object segmentation, keypoint detection, and instance segmentation
(Row 8-10).
Abstract
In-context learning, as a new paradigm in NLP , allows
the model to rapidly adapt to various tasks with only a hand-
ful of prompts and examples. But in computer vision, the
difficulties for in-context learning lie in that tasks vary sig-
nificantly in the output representations, thus it is unclear
how to define the general-purpose task prompts that the vi-
*Equal contribution. Correspondence to xinlong.wang96@gmail.com.
This work is done when Wen Wang is an intern at BAAI.
sion model can understand and transfer to out-of-domain
tasks. In this work, we present Painter, a generalist model
which addresses these obstacles with an “image”-centric
solution, that is, to redefine the output of core vision tasks
as images, and specify task prompts as also images. With
this idea, our training process is extremely simple, which
performs standard masked image modeling on the stitch of
input and output image pairs. This makes the model capable
of performing tasks conditioned on visible image patches.
Thus, during inference, we can adopt a pair of input and
1
arXiv:2212.02499v2  [cs.CV]  24 Mar 2023

output images from the same task as the input condition, to
indicate which task to perform. Without bells and whistles,
our generalist Painter can achieve competitive performance
compared to well-established task-specific models, on seven
representative vision tasks ranging from high-level visual
understanding to low-level image processing. In addition,
Painter significantly outperforms recent generalist models
on several challenging tasks.
1. Introduction
Training one generalist model that can execute diverse
tasks simultaneously, and even can perform a new task given
a prompt and very few examples, is one important step closer
to artificial general intelligence. In NLP, the emergence of
in-context learning [2, 7, 18] presents a new path in this
direction, which uses language sequences as the general
interface and allows the model to rapidly adapt to various
language-centric tasks with only a handful of prompts and
examples.
Thus far, in computer vision, in-context learning is rarely
explored and remains unclear how to achieve that. This can
be attributed to the differences between two modalities. One
difference is that NLP tasks mainly consist of language un-
derstanding and generation, so their output spaces can be
unified as sequences of discrete language tokens. But vision
tasks are the abstractions of raw visual input to varied gran-
ularity and angles. Thus, vision tasks vary significantly in
output representations, leading to various task-specific loss
functions and architecture designs. The second difference is
that the output space of NLP tasks is even the same as the
input. Thus, the task instruction and the example’s input/out-
put, which are all language-token sequences, can be directly
used as the input condition (also denoted as the task prompt),
which can be processed straightforwardly by the large lan-
guage model. However, in computer vision, it is unclear
how to define general-purpose task prompts or instructions
that the vision model can understand and transfer to out-of-
domain tasks. Several recent attempts [6, 9, 10, 27, 35, 41]
tackle these difficulties by following the solutions in NLP.
They more-or-less convert vision problems into NLP ones
via discretizing the continuous output spaces of vision tasks,
and using the language or specially-designed discrete tokens
as the task prompts.
However, we believe that images speak in images, i.e.,
image itself is a natural interface for general-purpose visual
perception. In this work, we address the above obstacles
with a vision-centric solution. The core observation is that
most dense-prediction vision problems can be formulated as
image inpainting, i.e.:
Given an input image, prediction is to inpaint the desired
but missing output “image”.
Thus, we need a representation of 3-channel tensor that
appears as an “image” for the output of the vision tasks,
and specify the task prompts using a pair of images. Here
we showcase several representative vision tasks for train-
ing, including depth estimation, human keypoint detection,
semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, image de-
noising, image deraining, and image enhancement, and unify
their output spaces using a 3-channel tensor, a.k.a. “out-
put image”. We carefully design the data format for each
task, such as instance mask and per-pixel discrete labels
of panoptic segmentation, per-pixel continuous values of
depth estimation, and high-precision coordinates of pose
estimation. Including more tasks is very straightforward, as
we only need to construct new data pairs and add them to
the training set, without modifications to either the model
architecture or loss function.
Based on this unification, we train a generalist Painter
model with an extremely simple training process. During
training, we stitch two images from the same task into a
larger image, and so do their corresponding output images.
Then we apply masked image modeling (MIM) on pixels of
the output image, with the input image being the condition.
With such a learning process, we enable the model to per-
form tasks conditioned on visible image patches, that is, the
capability of in-context prediction with the visual signal as
context.
Thus the trained model is capable of the in-context infer-
ence. That is, we directly use the input/output paired images
from the same task as the input condition to indicate which
task to perform. Examples of in-context inference are illus-
trated in Figure 1, consisting of seven in-domain examples
(seven rows at top) and three out-of-domain examples (three
rows at bottom). This definition of task prompts does not
require deep understanding of language instructions as need
by almost all previous approaches, and makes it very flexible
for performing both in-domain and out-of-domain vision
tasks.
Without bells and whistles, our model can achieve com-
petitive performance compared to well-established task-
specific models, on several fundamental vision tasks across
high-level visual understanding to low-level image process-
ing, namely, depth estimation on NYUv2 [37], semantic
segmentation on ADE-20K [54], human keypoint detection
on COCO [31], panoptic segmentation on COCO [31], and
three low-level image restoration tasks. Notably, on depth
estimation of NYUv2, our model achieves state-of-the-art
performance, outperforming previous best results by large
margins which have heavy and specialized designs on archi-
tectures and loss functions. Compared to other generalist
models, Painter yields significant improvements on several
challenging tasks.
2

2. Related Work
Unified Modeling The emergence of Transformer [40]
provides the possibility to share the basic modeling module
across different modalities. Until now, Transformers are
widely-adopted in language [7, 12, 32], vision [4, 8, 9, 14, 33],
speech [13, 17, 24] and multimodal [23, 34, 38] domains.
Perceiver [22] and Perceiver-IO [21] are the first attempts
to use the exact same Transformer architecture in different
domains, such as natural language and visual understanding
processing, StarCraft II, and multi-modal domains. If the
input could be transformed to a sequence of tokens, one can
adopt Transformer for modeling the relationships between
different tokens.
Vision Generalist Due to the general modeling capabil-
ity of Transformer, there are some efforts to unify different
tasks in vision domains, resulting in several vision general-
ists [9, 10, 27, 35, 55]. DETR [8] first adopted Transformer
as the task specific head for object detection. Based on this,
Pix2Seq [9] defined the output space of object detection as
a discrete space, and conduct this task in an auto-regressive
manner. Due to the fundamental nature of object detection,
Pix2Seq provides a direction for unifying different vision
tasks using discrete spaces, thus motivating a lot of following
work. Unified-IO [35] and OFA [41] both homogenize the
diverse inputs and outputs to a sequence of discrete tokens,
perform joint modeling in a sequence-to-sequence manner
over vision, vision & language and NLP tasks, and use T5-
style architectures [36] with billions of parameters, where
Unified-IO unifies more tasks than OFA with larger size of
models. Pix2Seq v2 [10] unified object detection, instance
segmentation, keypoint estimation and image captioning in
the same defined discrete spaces as Pix2Seq. UViM [27] uni-
fied pixel-labeling tasks with the same modeling approach
but trained separate models for different tasks, such as panop-
tic segmentation, depth estimation and colorization.
Notably, from our point of view, the input of visual signals
is continuous in nature, thus we try to make the output space
of several representative vision tasks as continuous as images
to reduce the quantization error caused by discretization and
further enable the in-context visual learning with masked
image modeling.
In-Context Learning For the first time, GPT-3 [7] de-
fined a new learning paradigm, in-context learning, where
a series of NLP tasks can be formulated as the text com-
pletion task given prompts and examples. In-context learn-
ing grants models new capabilities to perform on-the-fly
computational reasoning or novel-pattern recognition that
is unlikely to have occurred in training. Flamingo [2] ex-
tended the input of the large language models to not only
texts but also images and videos, but still used languages
as the general interface, such that the model can perform
many visual-linguistic tasks given prompts and examples,
such as image captioning, visual question answering, optical
character recognition (OCR), etc. In other domains, it ap-
pears non-trivial to directly introduce the in-context learning
capability. AD [28] uses algorithm distillation to combine in-
context capability with reinforcement learning. In computer
vision, a concurrent work [6] performs inpainting on the
figures and infographics from vision articles, but only works
for predicting on discrete space as the language domain, and
shows the in-context capability on foreground segmentation,
single object detection and colorization. While the work [6]
proves the concept of in-context learning for vision tasks, no
results were reported on standard benchmark datasets. Thus,
it remains unclear how the method performs on real-world
datasets. In contrast, our model works well with masked
image modeling on pixels on seven diverse and challenging
vision tasks, including depth estimation, keypoint estima-
tion, semantic segmentation, panoptic segmentation, image
denoising, image deraining, and image enhancement, and
also shows highly competitive performance on these tasks.
3. Approach
The core idea of our framework is to reformulate most
vision tasks such as depth estimation, semantic segmenta-
tion, instance segmentation, keypoint detection and image
restoration as an image inpainting problem. To do so, we
redefine the output space of those tasks as “images”.
3.1. Redefining Output Spaces as “Images”
We denote an input image asx with the size ofH ×W ×3,
and standard definition of the task ground truth as yt which
has various sizes for different task t, and we redefine these
task outputs still in the image space, denoting as ˆyt with the
size of H × W × 3. Our philosophy is to keep the spatial
relationships between pixels to be intact, and each pixel of
the output image still represents the output for this task of the
corresponding input image pixel but in the RGB space. That
is, ˆyt
i,j with three dimensions denotes the corresponding
ground truth of input pixel xi,j. We select seven representa-
tive vision tasks with diverse types of outputs, such as depth
estimation, semantic segmentation, keypoint detection and
panoptic segmentation. Here we show how we redefine the
per pixel ground-truth for each task as a 3-channel tensor,
similar to the RGB space. Note that in theory, a fixed num-
ber of output channels can serve our purpose. We choose 3
channels to make an image.
Monocular depth estimation is a dense prediction task
with weak semantics, to estimate the per-pixel depth value
(distance relative to the camera) given an input RGB image.
For NYUv2 [37], the per-pixel ground-truth depth yt
i,j is
a real value in the range of [0, 10] meters. Here we map
the ground-truth value from real-valued range [0, 10] to the
integer space with range [0, 255], ˆyt
i,j,0 = ⌊yt
i,j × 255
10 ⌋, and
3

let the three channels ˆyt
i,j,0, ˆyt
i,j,1 and ˆyt
i,j,2 be the same
ground truth. In inference, we directly average the outputs
of the three channels and then perform the inverse linear
transformation of the training to obtain a depth estimate in
the range of [0, 10].
Semantic segmentation is a dense prediction task with
strong semantics, to predict the per-pixel semantic label
given an input image. Given a semantic segmentation task
with L categories, we let the RGB space to represent these L
categories with the same margin in each space. We represent
L as a 3-digit number with b-base system, where b = ⌈L
1
3 ⌉,
and ˆyt
i,j,0, ˆyt
i,j,1 and ˆyt
i,j,2 represent their hundreds, tens
and ones places, with a margin defined as m = ⌊ 256
b ⌋. For
example, ADE-20K [54] has 150 semantic categories with
one background class, thus we set the base as b = 6, and
the margin as m = 42. The output channels are defined as
ˆyt
i,j,0 = ⌊ l
b2 ⌋ ×m, ˆyt
i,j,1 = ⌊ l
b ⌋ mod b×m, and ˆyt
i,j,2 = l
mod b × m, where l denotes the corresponding category and
is an integer value in range of [0, L). In inference, we dis-
cretize the output of each pixel with the marginm and obtain
its corresponding category.
Keypoint detection is a fine-grained localization task to
simultaneously detect the objects (e.g., human) and localize
their detailed keypoints. We follow recent heatmap-based
top-down pipeline [46], thus it is defined as a 17-category
point-localization task for human keypoint detection. For
each keypoint, we need to localize it to its corresponding
pixel, which is very fine-grained. We decouple this task
into a combination of 17-category keypoint classification
using two channels of ˆyt
i,j,1 and ˆyt
i,j,2, and class-agnostic
keypoint localization using another channel of ˆyt
i,j,0. For
the 17-category classification task, we define each keypoint
as a 9×9 pixel square, and define the color of each square
using the approach in semantic segmentation. For the class-
agnostic point localization task, we define 17 squares, each
of which is a 17 ×17 heatmap with Gaussian distribution
that the center pixel with largest value of 255 is the position
of the ground truth keypoint. In inference, we obtain the
category and location for each keypoint as the final results
from the 3-channel output image.
Panoptic segmentation is a combination of semantic seg-
mentation task and instance segmentation task. Thus, we
perform these two tasks separately for ease of redefinition
of output space and optimization, and then combine their
results to obtain the results for panoptic segmentation.
Here we introduce the redefinition of output space of
class-agnostic instance segmentation. For this task, we di-
rectly change the color of each instance mask in the image
to the same one, thus different instances use different colors.
In theory, we can randomly choose colors for different in-
stances, but we find that this setting would make the model
hard to optimize. To address this optimization issue, we
Animage A masked patchA patchAGTimage
Two pairs
Lreg
VisionTransformers
Image pairs
Masking
Figure 2. The training pipeline of the masked image modeling
(MIM) framework.
follow SOLO [42] to assign the color of each instance mask
according to the absolute position of its center in the image.
We conceptually divide the image into 16×20×20 blocks,
corresponding to three channels respectively. We assign a
fixed color to each block, then color the mask accordingly if
its center locates in that block. In inference, we adopt each
color as a kernel to compute the distance with each pixel in
the image, and then set a threshold to get the final masks. To
get the category for each instance mask, we directly assign
the majority category in the semantic segmentation result
within each instance mask as its category.
Image restoration takes the corrupted image as input and
outputs the corresponding clean image. In this paper, we in-
vestigate three representative image restoration tasks, includ-
ing image denoising, image deraining, and low-light image
enhancement. Since both the input and output are inherently
defined in the RGB space, these tasks can be seamlessly
unified in our Painter model without any transformation.
3.2. A Masked Image Modeling Framework
Based on the redefinition of the output spaces of above
representative vision tasks, the input and output of these
tasks are all images. Thus, here we directly apply a stan-
dard masked image modeling (MIM) pipeline [5, 19, 48] for
training, illustrated in Figure 2. This framework consists of
three major components: input format, architecture and loss
function.
Input Format During training, each input sample is the
concatenation of two pairs of images from the same task,
which have already been applied data augmentations sep-
arately, as shown in the left part of Figure 2. Each image
pair consists of one image and its corresponding task output,
which is also redefined as an image. We randomly mask
the task output image and train the model to reconstruct the
missing pixels. For the masked area, we follow the NLP
4

community [32, 38] and previous works [5, 19, 48] to use a
learnable token vector to replace each masked patch. We
adopt the block-wise masking strategy and find the masking
ratio as 75% to work well.
Architecture We adopt a vanilla vision Transformer
(ViT) [14] as the encoder, which consists of stacked Trans-
former blocks, e.g., 24 blocks for ViT-large. We concatenate
4 feature maps evenly sampled from these blocks and use
a simple three-layer head to map the features of each patch
to its original resolution, e.g., 16 × 16 × 3. Specifically,
the head consists of a linear (1×1 convolution) layer, a 3×3
convolution layer, and another linear layer.
Since each input sample includes both the input image
and its output image, the input resolution can be larger than
the traditional training process, and also the computation
cost. To address this problem, we propose to reduce the
computation cost by merging the early features of the input
image and the output image. Specifically, we feed the input
image and the output image to the model in parallel, then add
their features patch by patch after a few blocks,e.g., 3 blocks
by default. This design saves nearly half of the computation
costs, but we find no degradation in performance.
Loss Function We use a simple regression loss to train
Painter. Specifically, smooth- ℓ1 [16] loss is computed on
the masked pixels. We also consider ℓ1 and ℓ2 in our experi-
ments, and we find that the smooth-ℓ1 loss achieves the best
performance.
3.3. In-Context Inference
At the first time, we design an in-context inference proce-
dure, which is very flexible for performing both in-domain
and out-of-domain vision tasks. As the input and output
spaces of vision tasks have been unified as images, we can
directly use the input/output paired images from the same
task as the input condition (task prompts) to indicate which
task to perform, and concatenate them with the input image
and a masked image for completing the corresponding task.
Examples are shown in Figure 1. This definition of task
prompt does not require deep understanding of language
instructions like previous approaches, but uses the visual sig-
nal as context which can be understood by the vision model
and well matches the nature of the visual domain.
Also, different task prompts would lead to different re-
sults. Thus, how to select or generate a more suitable task
prompt can be a new direction to explore. Here we present
two simple baselines and we leave more explorations as the
future work. The first baseline is to obtain a better prompt
via selection, that we traverse the whole training set in a
heuristic manner and select the best-performing example
pair for each task. The second baseline is to generate a task
prompt. We define the task prompt as the learnable tensors,
freeze the whole model, and then use the training loss to
optimize the task prompts. We compare these two solutions
with the random counterpart in the experiments with the
visualizations, as shown in §4.3.
4. Experiments
4.1. Settings
Datasets and input format NYUv2 [37] dataset consists
of 464 indoor scenes captured by a Microsoft Kinect camera.
The official training split (24K images) is used for training,
and we report the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), absolute
mean relative error (A.Rel) and the percentage of inside
pixels with different thresholds ofδ on the 654 testing images
from 215 indoor scenes.
ADE20K [54] is a widely-used semantic segmentation
dataset, covering a broad range of 150 semantic categories.
It has 25K images in total, with 20K for training, 2K for
validation, and another 3K for testing. We adopt the widely-
used metric of mean IoU (mIoU) for evaluation.
MS-COCO [31] contains approximately 118K training
images and 5K validation images used for evaluation, with
80 “things” and 53 “stuff” categories. Panoptic segmenta-
tion task is evaluated on the union of “things” and “stuff”
categories. During training, we generate the output images
of semantic segmentation with 133 categories, and the class-
agnostic instance segmentation with only “things” categories.
During inference, we perform inference twice for each in-
put image to obtain the results of semantic segmentation
and class-agnostic instance segmentation, respectively, then
merge them together to get the results of panoptic segmenta-
tion. We report panoptic quality as the measure.
For human keypoint detection, we use the standard person
detection results from Simple Baseline [46], which use the
standard splits on COCO with 15K training samples and
validation set for evaluation, and report the AP based on
OKS as the evaluation metric [46].
Image restoration tasks are evaluated on several popu-
lar benchmarks, including SIDD [1] for image denoising,
LoL [45] for low-light image enhancement, and the merged
deraining dataset [51] for deraining. More details about
these datasets are provided in Table S1.
Training details During training, we employ an AdamW
optimizer [25] with a cosine learning rate scheduler, and
train for 54K iterations. The training hyper-parameters are:
the batch size as 2048, base learning rate as 1 e−3, weight
decay as 0.05, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, drop path [20] ra-
tio as 0.1, warm-up for 5.4K iterations. A light data aug-
mentation strategy is used: random resize cropping with
scale range of [0.3, 1] and a aspect ratio range of [3/4, 4/3],
followed by a random flipping. The input image size is
448 × 448 by default. The sampling weight for each task
is 0.1 (NYUv2 depth estimation), 0.2 (ADE-20K semantic
segmentation), 0.15 (COCO class-agnostic instance segmen-
tation), 0.25 (COCO semantic segmentation), 0.2 (COCO
5

Test image Prediction Ground truth Test image Prediction Ground truth
ADE20K-SemNYUv2-DepthCOCO-Ins
COCO-Pose
DenoisingDerainingEnhancement
Figure 3. Visualizations of examples and predictions obtained by our Painter for different tasks , such as semantic segmentation,
depth estimation, instance segmentation, human keypoint detection, image denoising, image deraining and low-light image enhancement.
Best viewed on screen.
human keypoint detection), 0.15 (image denoising), 0.05
image deraining, and 0.05 (low-light image enhancement).
4.2. Results
System-level comparison With the corresponding task
prompts, we compare our approach, Painter, with recent best
vision generalist models and specialized models on seven
representative tasks, shown in Table 1. Without task-specific
design, our Painter sets new records on NYUv2 depth esti-
mation, outperforming not only vision generalists, such as
Unified-IO [35] and UViM [27], but also the state-of-the-art
specialized model, e.g., BinsFormer [30]. For COCO key-
point detection, Painter significantly outperforms the general-
ist model Pix2Seq v2 [10] by 7.3 AP. For ADE-20K semantic
segmentation, COCO panoptic segmentation, and the three
low-level image processing tasks, our model achieves com-
parable performance to those well-designed task-specific
models. There is still much room for boosting our approach
compared to other well-designed specialized models. For
example, our default input image size is 448 × 448 while
those specialized panoptic segmentation models use a much
larger resolution, e.g., 1024 × 1024 in Mask2Former [11].
6

depth estimation semantic seg. panoptic seg. keypoint det. denoising deraining enhance.
NYUv2 ADE-20K COCO COCO SIDD 5 datasets LoL
RMSE↓ A.Rel↓ δ1 ↑ mIoU↑ PQ↑ AP↑ PSNR↑ SSIM↑ PSNR↑ SSIM↑ PSNR↑ SSIM↑
specialized models
DenseDepth [3] 0.465 0.123 0.846 - - - - - - - - -
BinsFormer [30] 0.330 0.094 0.925 - - - - - - - - -
UperNet-ViT-L [47] - - - 49.9 - - - - - - - -
Mask2Former [11] - - - 57.7 57.8 - - - - - - -
DETR [8] - - - - 45.6 - - - - - - -
HRNet [46] - - - - - 76.3 - - - - - -
HRFormer [11] - - - - - 77.2 - - - - - -
Uformer [44] - - - - - - 39.89 0.960 - - - -
MPRNet [50] - - - - - - 39.71 0.958 32.73 0.921 - -
MIRNet-v2 [51] - - - - - - 39.84 0.959 - - 24.74 0.851
generalist framework, specialized models
UViM [27] 0.467 - - - 45.8 - - - - - - -
generalist models
Unified-IO [35] 0.385 - - - - - - - - - - -
Pix2Seq v2 [10] - - - - - 64.8 - - - - - -
Painter (ours) 0.288 0.080 0.950 49.9 43.4 72.1 38.88 0.954 29.49 0.868 22.40 0.872
Table 1. System-level comparison with the vision generalist models, and the recent best specialized models on seven representative tasks
covering high-level visual understanding and low-level image processing. We compare with the best results of each method. The backbones
of the listed generalist methods are: ViT-L for UViM, Unified-IOXL with 2925M parameters, ViT-B with another Transformer decoder for
Pix2Seq v2, and ViT-L for Painter.
depth estimation semantic seg. panoptic seg. keypoint det. denoising deraining enhance.
NYUv2 ADE-20K COCO COCO SIDD 5 datasets LoL
RMSE↓ A.Rel↓ δ1 ↑ mIoU↑ PQ↑ AP↑ PSNR↑ SSIM↑ PSNR↑ SSIM↑ PSNR↑ SSIM↑
separate training 0.327 0.090 0.930 47.2 41.3 72.5 38.43 0.956 28.28 0.844 21.67 0.850
joint training 0.288 0.080 0.950 49.9 43.4 72.1 38.88 0.954 29.49 0.868 22.40 0.872
Table 2. Comparison of the models with the settings of joint training vs. separate training on seven representative tasks. For the separate
training setting, we train the model separately on each task with the same number of iterations as joint training on this task.
Achieving state-of-the-art performance on every task is not
the major goal of this paper, and we leave this as future work.
Joint training vs. separate training We compare two
training settings, i.e., joint training and separate training,
in Table 2. For the separate training setting, we train each
model separately on each task with the same number of
iterations and architectures as joint training on this task.
We can observe that models with joint training generally
outperform that with separate training on most of the tasks,
indicating that our in-context training approach with the
unification of output spaces can somewhat benefit them from
each other. But conflict may still exist, e.g., joint training
performs slightly worse on keypoint detection. Exploring
the relationships between tasks in our simple and unified
framework could be an interesting and promising direction.
Qualitative results To demonstrate the capability of our
generalist model in an intuitive perspective, we visualize the
task output of the selected images from the validation set
of several in-domain tasks, such as semantic segmentation,
depth estimation, instance segmentation, human keypoint
detection, image denoising, image deraining, and low-light
image enhancement. As shown in Figure 3, Painter can make
very accurate predictions on all these tasks.
4.3. Prompt Tuning
Different task prompts would lead to varied results. Here
we compare three simple baselines, ‘random’, ‘searched’
and ‘learned’ prompts. Random prompts denote to randomly
select one example from that task as the prompt. Searched
prompt denotes to traverse the training set in a heuristic
manner and select the best-performing example pair for each
task. Learned prompt denotes that we define the task prompt
as the learnable tensors, freeze the whole model, and then
use the training loss to optimize the task prompts.
The qualitative comparisons are shown in Table 3 . We
can see that the model using the searched and learned
prompts perform better than that with random ones, which
indicates that the optimization process helps the task to find a
more suitable prompt. Also, the model with random prompts
7

depth estimation semantic seg. panoptic seg. keypoint det. denoising deraining enhance.
NYUv2 ADE-20K COCO COCO SIDD 5 datasets LoL
RMSE↓ A.Rel↓ δ1 ↑ mIoU↑ PQ↑ AP↑ PSNR↑ SSIM↑ PSNR↑ SSIM↑ PSNR↑ SSIM↑
random prompts 0.291 0.080 0.949 49.3 43.1 71.8 38.46 0.953 29.26 0.865 22.31 0.871
searched prompts 0.288 0.080 0.950 49.9 43.4 72.1 38.88 0.954 29.49 0.868 22.40 0.872
learned prompts 0.286 0.080 0.949 49.9 43.3 72.2 38.71 0.954 29.56 0.870 22.38 0.872
Table 3. Comparison of the models with random prompts, searched prompts, and learned prompts for different tasks.
Model mIoU ↑
MAE-VQGAN [6] 58.3
Painter 62.3
Table 4. Quantitative results on open-vocabulary FSS-1000.
Figure 4. Visualizations of examples and predictions obtained by
Painter, such as open-vocabulary keypoint detection (e.g., horse,
monkey and broom), object segmentation (koala and butterfly) and
instance segmentation (tablets).
works relatively well, indicating the robustness of our model.
In Figure S6, we show the visualizations of the learned
prompt images for different tasks.
It is very promising that the performance of a task can
be improved by optimizing the input prompt. This provides
the possibility that if a category or task does not appear
in the training data, we can still achieve relatively good
performance on this task by optimizing the prompts, without
tuning the parameters of the model, which is also one core
advantage of in-context learning.
4.4. Generalization
The core property of in-context learning is that it allows
the model to rapidly adapt to various tasks with only a hand-
ful of prompts and examples. Here, we explore this capa-
bility via visualizations, shown in Figure 1, Figure 4, and
Figure S5. From these visualizations, we find that our model
can perform the task seen in training but with input im-
ages that their categories are unseen in training, such as
open-vocabulary keypoint detection ( e.g., monkey, horse
and broom), object segmentation (koala) and instance seg-
mentation (tablets). In addition, we quantitatively evaluate
Painter on a few-shot segmentation benchmark which re-
quires to segment objects of 1k novel classes. Painter largely
outperforms a concurrent work [6], as reported in Table 4,
5. Discussion and Conclusion
In this work, for the first time, we explore how to per-
form in-context visual learning and present a vision-centric
solution in which the context is defined as visual signals.
Thus, the models are granted with the capability to perform
tasks conditioned on the paired data from that task, that is,
in-context inference. Our approach achieves highly competi-
tive performance on a representative and diverse set of seven
tasks.
This work is not without drawbacks. First, there is still
much room for boosting our approach especially on the
difficult task of panoptic segmentation, comparing to the spe-
cialized models. In addition, since our approach is designed
based on visual signals as contexts, this general interface
does not seem natural for modeling language signals. How
to model discrete language signals as continuous ones seems
to be an impressive direction, and some work has started to
emerge recently.
While there are previous approaches that hope to use
general interfaces to solve multiple vision tasks, we may be
the first to grant models the ability to learn and complete
tasks in context, which does have the opportunity to handle
out-of-domain tasks. We hope this work will draw attention
to this promising direction, and we believe that the best
GPT-3 moment in the vision field is yet to come.
Acknowledgement
This project is supported by the National Key R&D Pro-
gram of China (2020AAA0105200). We would like to thank
Hanxiao Qu, Yemin Shi, Yan Tian, and Xigang Cao for their
help on the GPU resources, Xinxin Liu and Kai Lu for beau-
tifying the figures, as well as other colleagues at Beijing
Academy of Artificial Intelligence for support throughout
this project.
8

References
[1] Abdelrahman Abdelhamed, Stephen Lin, and Michael S
Brown. A high-quality denoising dataset for smartphone
cameras. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2018.
[2] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine
Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc, Arthur Men-
sch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza
Rutherford, Serkan Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina
Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian
Borgeaud, Andrew Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Shar-
ifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals,
Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual
language model for few-shot learning. Adv. Neural Inform.
Process. Syst., 2022.
[3] Ibraheem Alhashim and Peter Wonka. High quality monoc-
ular depth estimation via transfer learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.11941, 2018.
[4] Roman Bachmann, David Mizrahi, Andrei Atanov, and Amir
Zamir. Multimae: Multi-modal multi-task masked autoen-
coders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01678, 2022.
[5] Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. BEiT: BERT
pre-training of image Transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.08254, 2021.
[6] Amir Bar, Yossi Gandelsman, Trevor Darrell, Amir Glober-
son, and Alexei A. Efros. Visual prompting via image in-
painting. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. , pages 1–24,
2022.
[7] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah,
Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav
Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models
are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
[8] Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas
Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-
end object detection with transformers. In Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pages 213–229, 2020.
[9] Ting Chen, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, David J. Fleet, and
Geoffrey Hinton. Pix2seq: A language modeling framework
for object detection. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, pages
1–17, 2021.
[10] Ting Chen, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Tsung-Yi Lin, David J.
Fleet, and Geoffrey Hinton. A unified sequence interface for
vision tasks. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2022.
[11] Bowen Cheng, Ishan Misra, Alexander G Schwing, Alexander
Kirillov, and Rohit Girdhar. Masked-attention mask trans-
former for universal image segmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.01527, 2021.
[12] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional trans-
formers for language understanding. Annual Conf. North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2018.
[13] Linhao Dong, Shuang Xu, and Bo Xu. Speech-transformer: a
no-recurrence sequence-to-sequence model for speech recog-
nition. In IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech & Signal Pro-
cess., pages 5884–5888, 2018.
[14] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov,
Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner,
Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Syl-
vain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is
worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
scale. In Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
[15] Xueyang Fu, Jiabin Huang, Delu Zeng, Yue Huang, Xinghao
Ding, and John Paisley. Removing rain from single images
via a deep detail network. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., 2017.
[16] Ross Girshick. Fast R-CNN. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., 2015.
[17] Anmol Gulati, James Qin, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Niki Par-
mar, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Wei Han, Shibo Wang, Zheng-
dong Zhang, Yonghui Wu, et al. Conformer: Convolution-
augmented transformer for speech recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.08100, 2020.
[18] Yaru Hao, Haoyu Song, Li Dong, Shaohan Huang, Zewen
Chi, Wenhui Wang, Shuming Ma, and Furu Wei. Lan-
guage models are general-purpose interfaces. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.06336, pages 1–32, 2022.
[19] Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr
Doll´ar, and Ross Girshick. Masked autoencoders are scalable
vision learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.06377, 2021.
[20] Gao Huang, Yu Sun, Zhuang Liu, Daniel Sedra, and Kilian
Weinberger. Deep networks with stochastic depth. In Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pages 646–661, 2016.
[21] Andrew Jaegle, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac,
Carl Doersch, Catalin Ionescu, David Ding, Skanda Kop-
pula, Daniel Zoran, Andrew Brock, Evan Shelhamer, Olivier
H´enaff, Matthew M. Botvinick, Andrew Zisserman, Oriol
Vinyals, and Jo˜ao Carreira. Perceiver IO: A general archi-
tecture for structured inputs and outputs. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, 2021.
[22] Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andy Brock, Oriol Vinyals,
Andrew Zisserman, and Joao Carreira. Perceiver: General
perception with iterative attention. In Int. Conf. Machine
Learn., pages 4651–4664. PMLR, 2021.
[23] Aishwarya Kamath, Mannat Singh, Yann LeCun, Gabriel
Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, and Nicolas Carion. Mdetr-modulated
detection for end-to-end multi-modal understanding. In IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pages 1780–1790, 2021.
[24] Shigeki Karita, Nanxin Chen, Tomoki Hayashi, Takaaki Hori,
Hirofumi Inaguma, Ziyan Jiang, Masao Someki, Nelson En-
rique Yalta Soplin, Ryuichi Yamamoto, Xiaofei Wang, et al.
A comparative study on transformer vs rnn in speech appli-
cations. In IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Under-
standing Workshop, pages 449–456, 2019.
[25] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 ,
2014.
[26] Alexander Kirillov, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr
Doll´ar. Panoptic feature pyramid networks. In IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pages 6399–6408, 2019.
[27] Alexander Kolesnikov, Andr ´e Susano Pinto, Lucas Beyer,
Xiaohua Zhai, Jeremiah Harmsen, and Neil Houlsby. UViM:
A unified modeling approach for vision with learned guiding
codes. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2022.
[28] Michael Laskin, Luyu Wang, Junhyuk Oh, Emilio Parisotto,
Stephen Spencer, Richie Steigerwald, DJ Strouse, Steven
9

Hansen, Angelos Filos, Ethan Brooks, Maxime Gazeau, Hi-
manshu Sahni, Satinder Singh, and V olodymyr Mnih. In-
context reinforcement learning with algorithm distillation.
Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., pages 1–21, 2022.
[29] Yu Li, Robby T Tan, Xiaojie Guo, Jiangbo Lu, and Michael S
Brown. Rain streak removal using layer priors. In IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2016.
[30] Zhenyu Li, Xuyang Wang, Xianming Liu, and Junjun Jiang.
BinsFormer: Revisiting adaptive bins for monocular depth
estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00987, 2022.
[31] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays,
Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll ´ar, and Lawrence
Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context. In
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pages 740–755, 2014.
[32] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar
Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettle-
moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized
bert pretraining approach. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2020.
[33] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng
Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. Swin transformer:
Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021.
[34] Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Vilbert:
Pretraining task-agnostic visiolinguistic representations for
vision-and-language tasks. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst.,
32, 2019.
[35] Jiasen Lu, Christopher Clark, Rowan Zellers, Roozbeh Mot-
taghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Unified-IO: A unified model
for vision, language, and multi-modal tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.08916, pages 1–19, 2022.
[36] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee,
Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J
Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a
unified text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 2020.
[37] Nathan Silberman, Derek Hoiem, Pushmeet Kohli, and Rob
Fergus. Indoor segmentation and support inference from rgbd
images. In Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pages 746–760. Springer,
2012.
[38] Weijie Su, Xizhou Zhu, Yue Cao, Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Furu
Wei, and Jifeng Dai. VL-Bert: Pre-training of generic visual-
linguistic representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08530,
2019.
[39] Ke Sun, Bin Xiao, Dong Liu, and Jingdong Wang. Deep high-
resolution representation learning for human pose estimation.
In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pages 5693–5703,
2019.
[40] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-
reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Adv. Neural Inform.
Process. Syst., 30, 2017.
[41] Peng Wang, An Yang, Rui Men, Junyang Lin, Shuai Bai,
Zhikang Li, Jianxin Ma, Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, and
Hongxia Yang. OFA: Unifying architectures, tasks, and
modalities through a simple sequence-to-sequence learning
framework. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022.
[42] Xinlong Wang, Tao Kong, Chunhua Shen, Yuning Jiang, and
Lei Li. Solo: Segmenting objects by locations. In Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., pages 649–665, 2020.
[43] Xinlong Wang, Rufeng Zhang, Tao Kong, Lei Li, and Chun-
hua Shen. SOlOv2: Dynamic and fast instance segmentation.
Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 33:17721–17732, 2020.
[44] Zhendong Wang, Xiaodong Cun, Jianmin Bao, Wengang
Zhou, Jianzhuang Liu, and Houqiang Li. Uformer: A general
u-shaped transformer for image restoration. In IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pages 17683–17693, 2022.
[45] Chen Wei, Wenjing Wang, Wenhan Yang, and Jiaying Liu.
Deep retinex decomposition for low-light enhancement.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1808.04560, 2018.
[46] Bin Xiao, Haiping Wu, and Yichen Wei. Simple baselines for
human pose estimation and tracking. In Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pages 472–487, 2018.
[47] Tete Xiao, Yingcheng Liu, Bolei Zhou, Yuning Jiang, and
Jian Sun. Unified perceptual parsing for scene understanding.
In Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pages 418–434, 2018.
[48] Zhenda Xie, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Yutong Lin, Jianmin
Bao, Zhuliang Yao, Qi Dai, and Han Hu. Simmim: A sim-
ple framework for masked image modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.09886, 2021.
[49] Wenhan Yang, Robby Tan, Jiashi Feng, Jiaying Liu, Zong-
ming Guo, and Shuicheng Yan. Deep joint rain detection and
removal from a single image. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., 2017.
[50] Syed Waqas Zamir, Aditya Arora, Salman Khan, Munawar
Hayat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Ling
Shao. Multi-stage progressive image restoration. In IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pages 14821–14831, 2021.
[51] Syed Waqas Zamir, Aditya Arora, Salman Hameed Khan,
Hayat Munawar, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Ming-Hsuan Yang,
and Ling Shao. Learning enriched features for fast image
restoration and enhancement. IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis
& Machine Intelligence, 2022.
[52] He Zhang and Vishal M. Patel. Density-aware single image
de-raining using a multi-stream dense network. In IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2018.
[53] He Zhang, Vishwanath Sindagi, and Vishal M. Patel. Image
de-raining using a conditional generative adversarial network.
IEEE Trans. Circuits & Systems for Video Tech., 30(11):3943–
3956, 2019.
[54] Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Tete Xiao, Sanja Fidler,
Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba. Semantic understand-
ing of scenes through the ade20k dataset. Int. J. Computer
Vision, 2018.
[55] Xizhou Zhu, Jinguo Zhu, Hao Li, Xiaoshi Wu, Hongsheng Li,
Xiaohua Wang, and Jifeng Dai. Uni-Perceiver: Pre-training
unified architecture for generic perception for zero-shot and
few-shot tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.01522 , pages
16783–16794, 2022.
10

Appendix
A. Additional Implementation Details
In this section, we provide additional details of the data
preparation and pose-processing for different tasks. PyTorch-
style pseudo-code is provided to better illustrate the imple-
mentation details. They can be done with a few operations
in implementation. For each task, Painter doesn’t involve
more complex post-processing compared to the specialist
methods.
Semantic segmentation As described in Section 3.1 of the
main paper, we formulate different semantic categories using
different colors in RGB space. To this end, we define the
background and ignore areas as black, i.e., pixels in color
(0, 0, 0), and generate the colors for foreground categories
using the pseudo-code elaborated in Figure S1.
During inference, to decode the output image to a single-
channel ID map where each pixel represents a class ID, we
compute the L1 distance between each output pixel and the
pre-defined colors for each semantic category, and take the
ID of the closest color as the predicted category. The pseudo-
code for the post-processing is illustrated in Figure S2.
def generate colors dict(b, K):
# b: the number of used values in a single channel
# K: the number of classes
m = 255 // b # get margin
colors = []
for class id in range(K):
# compute margin multiplier
r mult = class id // b ∗∗2
g mult = (class id %
b mult = class id %
# compute r, g, b values
r = 255 − r mult ∗ m
g = 255 − g mult ∗ m
b = 255 − b mult ∗ m
colors.append((r, g, b))
return colors
Figure S1. Pseudo-code for generating colors. / /: floor division;
%: mod operation.
def forward(image, colors):
# image: (H, W, 3)
# colors: (K, 3), where K is the number of classes
# get distance between pixels and pre −defined colors
dist = (image.view(H, W, 1, 3) − colors.view(1, 1, K, 3)
).abs().sum(−1) # (H, W, K)
segm = dist.argmin(dim= −1) # (H, W)
return segm
Figure S2. Pseudo-code of semantic segmentation post-processing.
Keypoint detection For keypoint detection, the output im-
age consists of the R channel which denotes the class-
agnostic heatmaps and the G/B channels that represent the
keypoint categories. As illustrated in Figure S3, we convert
the output image to a 17-channel heatmap, and follow the
commonly used post-processing [39, 46] to obtain the final
keypoint locations.
def forward(image, colors):
# image: (H, W, 3)
# colors: (K, 3), where K is the number of keypoints
# r for heatmaps and gb for keypoint classes
r = images[..., 0] # (H, W)
gb = images[..., 1:] # (H, W, 2)
# get keypoint class of each pixel
dist = (gb.view(H, W, 1, 2) − colors.view(1, 1, K, 2)).
abs().sum(−1) # (H, W, K)
segm = dist.argmin(dim= −1) # (H, W)
for idx in range(K):
mask = segm == idx
heatmap = mask ∗ r # (H, W)
heatmaps.append(heatmap)
heatmaps = stack(heatmaps) # (K, H, W)
return heatmaps
Figure S3. Pseudo-code of keypoint detection post-processing.
stack: concatenates a sequence of tensors along a new dimension.
Panoptic segmentation As described in Section 3.2, we
decompose the panoptic segmentation task into semantic
segmentation and class-agnostic instance segmentation. Dur-
ing training, the semantic segmentation sub-task uses the
same setting as the semantic segmentation on ADE-20K [54],
except that we set the baseb = 7when assigning colors. Sim-
ilar to the color generation process of semantic segmentation,
we generate colors for each location category [42] used in
class-agnostic instance segmentation. The color of each
instance mask is determined by the location of its center.
During inference, the semantic ID map can be obtained
using the post-processing described in Figure S2, while the
class-agnostic instance masks are generated by thresholding
the distance between predicted colors and the pre-defined
colors for location categories. Matrix NMS [43] is adopted
to remove duplicate instance predictions. We apply the ma-
jority vote of pixels from the semantic prediction to get
the semantic class for each instance mask, as illustrated in
Figure S4. Finally, we follow Panoptic FPN [26] to merge
the semantic segmentation and the instance segmentation
predictions to obtain the panoptic segmentation results.
Image restoration The detailed statistics of the datasets that
are used for image restoration are shown in Table S1.
11

Tasks Deraining Enhance.Denoising
Datasets Rain14000 [15] Rain1800 [49] Rain800 [53] Rain100H [49] Rain100L [49] Rain1200 [52] Rain12 [29]LoL [45]SIDD [1]
Train Samples 11200 1800 700 0 0 0 12 485 320
Test Samples 2800 0 100 100 100 1200 0 15 40
Testset RenameTest2800 - Test100 Rain100H Rain100L Test1200 - - -
Table S1. Dataset description for image restoration tasks.
(a) Patch merging
merging? mIoU mAcc
✗ 39.7 51.1
✓ 41.2 53.0
(b) Encoder
backbone mIoU mAcc
ViT-B 31.4 41.4
ViT-L 41.2 53.0
(c) Head type
head mIoU mAcc
linear 38.6 50.2
light 41.2 53.0
(d) Loss function
loss mIoU mAcc
ℓ1 40.6 52.5
ℓ2 26.3 37.7
smooth-ℓ1 41.2 53.0
Table S2. Ablation study on ADE-20K semantic segmentation. (a) merging patch after three transformer blocks; (b) encoder; (c) head type;
(d) loss function.
def forward(segm dist, inst masks):
# segm dist: (H, W, K), where K is the number of thing
classes
# inst masks: (N, H, W), where N is the number of
instances
# turn distances to scores
segm scores = 1. − semseg dist / max(semseg dist)
# majority vote
class probs = einsum("nhw,hwk −>nk", inst masks,
segm scores) # (N, K)
pred classes = class probs.argmax(dim=−1) # (N,)
return pred classes
Figure S4. Pseudo-code of majority voting for labeling each in-
stance mask. einsum: Einstein summation.
B. Additional Results
We report the results of ablation experiments on several
components of our framework, with a shorter schedule of 3k
iterations and other hyper-parameters unchanged on seman-
tic segmentation of ADE-20K.
Merging patches During training, each input sample con-
sists of both the input image and output image, which results
in high memory cost and significantly slows down the train-
ing process. We reduce nearly half of the computation costs
by merging the early features of the input image and the
output image, i.e., adding their features patch by patch after
a three blocks. Table S2a shows that this new design even
incurs performance increase. We argue that this design fur-
ther provides the pixel-to-pixel correspondence between the
input and its output via stacking them together. But in the
original setting, these relationships need to be learned by
the model, which will make the optimization more difficult
especially in a short schedule.
Figure S5. More visualizations. The visualized tasks include
keypoint detection, object segmentation and instance segmentation
on potato, bee, and tomato.
Encoder We adopt standard Vision Transformer (ViT) [14]
with different model sizes as the encoder, including ViT-base
and ViT-large. Results are shown in Table S2b. We find that
the model with ViT-L outperforms that with ViT-B by very
large margins. This observation is intuitive, that generally
larger models yield better performance. For generalist mod-
els, they can use more data but with less task-specific prior
on method design, thus may require more model capacity
than task-specific models.
Head We use a light three-layer head that consists of a lin-
ear (1×1 convolution) layer, a 3×3 convolution layer, and
another linear layer, to map the feature of each patch to its
original resolution, e.g., 16 × 16 × 3. The feature of each
12

COCO-SemNYUv2-DepthCOCO-Pose COCO-InsDenoising
Figure S6. Visualizations of the learned prompts for different tasks. Each column denotes a prompt pair for a task. The first and second rows
are input and output images respectively. For visualization, each prompt is normalized to an RGB image with values between 0 and 255.
Different tasks show different patterns. Users can take the prompt images and feed them to the Painter model to enable the corresponding
application.
patch is the concatenation of the 4 feature maps evenly sam-
pled from the transformer blocks. As shown in Table S2c,
the light head achieves clear gains over the baseline with
only a linear layer.
Loss function Painter uses a simple pixel regression loss
to learn all the tasks. In Table S2d, we compare different
regression loss functions, including ℓ1, ℓ2, and smooth-ℓ1.
We adopt smooth-ℓ1 by default as it achieves the best perfor-
mance and is also more stable during training.
C. Additional Visualization
In this section, we provide more visualizations. As shown
in Figure S5, Painter performs in-context inference accord-
ing to different prompt images. Note that Painter is never
trained to solve these tasks during training, e.g., keypoint
detection of potato, object segmentation of bee, and instance
segmentation of tomato.
13